docs/mcp-scan/guardrails.md, before:

---
title: Guardrails in MCP-Scan
description: Use MCP-scan to ensure your MCP servers are safe to use.
icon: bootstrap/lock
---

# Guardrails in `mcp-scan`

<div class='subtitle'>
Safeguard and restrict your MCP tool calls and responses.
</div>

The `mcp-scan proxy` command supports dynamic guardrailing for MCP servers, letting you enforce safety rules during tool use. It comes with a set of default guardrails and allows you to define custom behavior through a configuration file.

This chapter covers how to structure guardrail configuration files, write custom rules, and apply enforcement at the client, server, and tool levels.

<img src="../assets/guardrails.svg" alt="proxying-overview-diagram" class="textwidth" style="max-width: 420pt; margin: 40pt auto; display: block;" />

!!! note
    By default, the configuration file is located at `~/.mcp-scan/guardrails-config.yml`.

!!! info "Get Started Directly"
    Just looking to get started quickly? The following example provides a quick way to get started with writing your very own config file. Just copy
    it into your config file and replace the client and server names.
    ```yaml
    <client-name>:  # your client's shorthand (e.g., cursor, claude, windsurf)
      <server-name>:  # your server's name according to the mcp config (e.g., whatsapp-mcp)
        guardrails:
          secrets: block # block calls/results with secrets

          custom_guardrails:
            # define a rule using Invariant Guardrails, https://explorer.invariantlabs.ai/docs/guardrails/
            - name: "Filter tool results with 'error'"
              id: "error_filter_guardrail"
              action: block # or 'log'
              content: |
                raise "An error was found." if:
                  (msg: ToolOutput)
                  "error" in msg.content
    ```

## File structure

The configuration file defines guardrailing behavior hierarchically, scoped by **client**, **server**, and **tool**. Below is a structured overview of the YAML format:

```yaml
<client-name>:
  <server-name>:
    guardrails:
      <default-guardrail-name>: <guardrail-action>
        ...

      custom_guardrails:
        - name: <guardrail-name>
          id: <guardrail-id>
          action: <guardrail-action>
          content: |
            <guardrail-content>
            ...
        
    tools:
      <tool-name>:
        <default-guardrail-name>: <guardrail-action>
        ...
        enabled: <boolean>
    ...
...
```

Each configuration block defines a set of **default**, **custom**, and **tool-level** guardrails for a specific `<client> / <server>` combination (e.g., a client like Cursor and a server like a Git MCP instance).

The ellipses (`...`) in the schema indicate that multiple entries can be added at each level:

- Multiple servers under a single client.

- Multiple guardrails under each guardrails section.

- Multiple tools under a server.

This structure supports flexible, fine-grained control across different environments and toolchains. The sections of the file are described below.


## Default guardrails

Default guardrails are pre-configured and run by default with the `log` action. Alternatively, their behavior can be overridden by specifying `<default-guardrail-name>: <guardrail-action>` as shown above. The following default guardrails exist and can be configured:

| Name        | Requirements   | Description                    |
|-------------|--------|----------------------------------------|
| `links`    | `None`  | Detects links. |
| `secrets`  | `None` | Detects secrets, such as tokens or api keys. |
| `pii`    |  `presidio`, `transformers` | Detects personally identifiable information, such as names, emails, or credit card numbers. |
| `moderated`   |  `ENV: OPENAI_API_KEY`  | Detects content that should be moderated, such as hate speech or explicit content. |


!!! note
    Some default guardrails require optional extra packages to run and are disabled if not installed. You can install them with the argument `--install-extras [list of extras]` to install a specific set of extras or `--install-extras all` to install all extras.


**Example:** Overriding a default guardrail.
```yaml
cursor:
  email-mcp-server:
    guardrails:
      pii: block
      secrets: paused
```

## Custom guardrails
Custom guardrails allow you to define rules tailored to specific workflows, data patterns, or business logic. These guardrails offer flexible semantics and can detect complex or domain-specific behaviors that aren't covered by the built-in defaults.

To get started writing custom rules, refer to the [rule writing reference](./rules.md) to get started quickly with writing guardrails, or explore the rest of this documentation to learn about the concepts in depth, perhaps [starting with this introduction](./index.md).

### Schema
A custom guardrail is defined using the following fields:

| Name        | Type        | Description                            |
|-------------|-------------|----------------------------------------|
| `name`      | `string`    | A name for the guardrail.  |
| `id`        |  `string`   | A unique identifier for the guardrail. |
| `action`    | `Guardrail Action` | The `action` to take when this guardrail is triggered. See below. |
| `content`   | `string`    | A multiline string defining the semantics of this guardrailing rule. Please refer to the rest of this documentation to see how to write guardrails. |

**Example:** Defining a custom guardrail.

Below is a `yaml` fragment that shows how a custom guardrail can be defined to ensure emails are only sent to trusted recipients.
```yaml
...
custom_guardrails:
  - name: "Trusted Recipient Email"
    id: "trusted_email_check"
    action: block
    content: |
      raise "Untrusted email recipient" if:
          (call: ToolCall)
          call is tool:send_email
          not match(".*@company.com", call.function.arguments.recipient)
...
```

## Tool-specific guardrails
Tool-specific guardrails allow you to override or refine guardrailing behavior for individual tools within a given server. This is useful when certain tools require stricter enforcement, relaxed rules, or even complete disabling.


### Schema
The following fields are available for each `tool`:

| Name        | Type        | Description                            |
|-------------|-------------|----------------------------------------|
| `<default-guardrail>` | `Guardrail Action`   | Overrides the behavior of `<default-guardrail>` for this tool specifically. |
| `enabled`   | `boolean`   | Disables tool when set to <span class='boolean-value-false'>False</span>. If this field is not provided, it defaults to <span class='boolean-value-true'>True</span>. |


!!! note
    While the tools section does not allow for defining custom guardrails, you can always use the `call is tool:<tool_name>` syntax to select a specific tool, as shown in the example from the previous section.

**Example:** Disabling and overriding behavior for tools.

The `yaml` fragment below demonstrates how to disable the `send_message` tool and override the behavior for the `secrets` default guardrail to be `block` specifically for the `read_messages` tool.
```yaml
...
tools:
  send_message:
    enabled: false 

  read_messages:
    secrets: block
...
```

## Guardrail actions
Guardrail actions define how the system responds when a guardrail is triggered. These actions let you tailor enforcement severity across different contexts - whether to silently monitor behavior, stop execution entirely, or pause enforcement temporarily.

The following actions are available:

| Name        | Description                            |
|-------------|----------------------------------------|
| `block`     | This will block the client outright, preventing it from executing what triggered the guardrail. |
| `log`       | This lets the client execute what triggered the guardrail, but logs it in the console, so you can monitor the violation patterns without blocking the client's workflow. |
| `paused`    | This pauses the enforcement of the guardrail.  |

These actions are available for both default and custom guardrails.


## Priority of rules
When multiple guardrail rules are defined for the same context (e.g., a default guardrail set at both the server and tool level), the system follows a strict priority hierarchy to determine which rule takes effect.

This ensures predictable behavior and allows for precise control, especially when configuring environments with overlapping scopes.


!!! note
    **Custom guardrails are not subject to this priority system**. Once defined, they are always active and enforced with their specified action, regardless of other configurations.

### Rule Priority (from highest to lowest)
1. **Tool-specific guardrails**  
   Guardrails defined for a specific tool override all other configurations.
2. **Client/server-specific guardrails**  
   Guardrails set at the server level for a particular client are used unless overridden by a tool-specific rule.
3. **Implicit default guardrails**  
   If no explicit rule is defined, the default guardrails apply automatically with the `log` action.

**Example:** A simple config file with overrides.

To see how this hierarchy of precedence works, consider the following example configuration:

```yaml
client:
  server:
    guardrails:
      pii: block
      secrets: paused
        
    tools:
      tool:
        secrets: block
```

The resulting behavior of this configuration is:

- `secrets` is set to block for the `tool`, because tool-specific guardrails have the highest priority.

- For all other tools on `server`, secrets is set to `paused`, as defined at the client/server level.

- For any other client/server combinations not defined in the config, `secrets` will use the implicit default and be set to `log`.

- `pii` is set to block across all tools under `server` due to the client/server setting. For all other combinations, it falls back to the implicit default (`log`).

This precedence ensures that you can enforce strict guardrails where needed, while still benefiting from broad default coverage elsewhere.


## Example file
Below is a complete example of a guardrail configuration file. 
It demonstrates how to define default and custom guardrails for specific clients and servers, apply tool-level overrides, and selectively enable or disable tools

```yaml
cursor:
  email-mcp-server:

    # Customize the guardrailing for this specific server
    guardrails:
      pii: block
      moderated: paused

      # Define multiple custom guardrails
      custom_guardrails:
        - name: "Trusted Recipient Email"
          id: "untrustsed_email_gr_1"
          action: block

          # Guardrail to ensure that we know all recipients
          content: |
            raise "Untrusted email recipient" if:
                (call: ToolCall)
                call is tool:send_email
                not match(".*@company.com", call.function.arguments.recipient)


          # Guardrail to ensure an email is not sent after 
          # a prompt injection is detected in the inbox
        - name: "PII Email"
          id: "untrustsed_email_gr_2"
          action: log
          content: |
            from invariant.detectors import prompt_injection

            raise "Suspicious email before send" if:
                (inbox: ToolOutput) -> (call: ToolCall)
                inbox is tool:get_inbox
                call is tool:send_email
                prompt_injection(inbox.content)

    # Specify the behavior of individual tools
    tools:
      send_message:
        enabled: false

      read_messages:
        secrets: block

  weather:
    guardrails:
      moderated: paused

# Separate configurations on a per client/server basis
claude:
  git-mcp-server:
    tools:
      commit-tool:
        links: paused
```

Commit message:

add custom guardrails section at client level (#9)

docs/mcp-scan/guardrails.md, after:

---
title: Guardrails in MCP-Scan
description: Use MCP-scan to ensure your MCP servers are safe to use.
icon: bootstrap/lock
---

# Guardrails in `mcp-scan`

<div class='subtitle'>
Safeguard and restrict your MCP tool calls and responses.
</div>

The `mcp-scan proxy` command supports dynamic guardrailing for MCP servers, letting you enforce safety rules during tool use. It comes with a set of default guardrails and allows you to define custom behavior through a configuration file.

This chapter covers how to structure guardrail configuration files, write custom rules, and apply enforcement at the client, server, and tool levels.

<img src="../assets/guardrails.svg" alt="proxying-overview-diagram" class="textwidth" style="max-width: 420pt; margin: 40pt auto; display: block;" />

!!! note
    By default, the configuration file is located at `~/.mcp-scan/guardrails-config.yml`.

!!! info "Get Started Directly"
    Just looking to get started quickly? The following example provides a quick way to get started with writing your very own config file. Just copy
    it into your config file and replace the client and server names.
    ```yaml
    <client-name>:  # your client's shorthand (e.g., cursor, claude, windsurf)
      <server-name>:  # your server's name according to the mcp config (e.g., whatsapp-mcp)
        guardrails:
          secrets: block # block calls/results with secrets

          custom_guardrails:
            # define a rule using Invariant Guardrails, https://explorer.invariantlabs.ai/docs/guardrails/
            - name: "Filter tool results with 'error'"
              id: "error_filter_guardrail"
              action: block # or 'log'
              content: |
                raise "An error was found." if:
                  (msg: ToolOutput)
                  "error" in msg.content
    ```

## File structure

The configuration file defines guardrailing behavior hierarchically, scoped by **client**, **server**, and **tool**. Below is a structured overview of the YAML format:

```yaml
<client-name>:
  custom_guardrails:
    ...

  <server-name>:
    guardrails:
      <default-guardrail-name>: <guardrail-action>
        ...

      custom_guardrails: 
        - name: <guardrail-name>
          id: <guardrail-id>
          action: <guardrail-action>
          content: |
            <guardrail-content>
            ...
        
    tools:
      <tool-name>:
        <default-guardrail-name>: <guardrail-action>
        ...
        enabled: <boolean>
    ...
...
```

Each configuration block defines a set of **default**, **custom**, and **tool-level** guardrails for a specific `<client> / <server>` combination (e.g., a client like Cursor and a server like a Git MCP instance).

The ellipses (`...`) in the schema indicate that multiple entries can be added at each level:

- Multiple servers under a single client.

- Multiple guardrails under each guardrails section.

- Multiple tools under a server.

This structure supports flexible, fine-grained control across different environments and toolchains. The sections of the file are described below.


## Default guardrails

Default guardrails are pre-configured and run by default with the `log` action. Alternatively, their behavior can be overridden by specifying `<default-guardrail-name>: <guardrail-action>` as shown above. The following default guardrails exist and can be configured:

| Name        | Requirements   | Description                    |
|-------------|--------|----------------------------------------|
| `links`    | `None`  | Detects links. |
| `secrets`  | `None` | Detects secrets, such as tokens or api keys. |
| `pii`    |  `presidio`, `transformers` | Detects personally identifiable information, such as names, emails, or credit card numbers. |
| `moderated`   |  `ENV: OPENAI_API_KEY`  | Detects content that should be moderated, such as hate speech or explicit content. |


!!! note
    Some default guardrails require optional extra packages to run and are disabled if not installed. You can install them with the argument `--install-extras [list of extras]` to install a specific set of extras or `--install-extras all` to install all extras.


**Example:** Overriding a default guardrail.
```yaml
cursor:
  email-mcp-server:
    guardrails:
      pii: block
      secrets: paused
```

## Custom guardrails
Custom guardrails allow you to define rules tailored to specific workflows, data patterns, or business logic. These guardrails offer flexible semantics and can detect complex or domain-specific behaviors that aren't covered by the built-in defaults.

To get started writing custom rules, refer to the [rule writing reference](./rules.md) to get started quickly with writing guardrails, or explore the rest of this documentation to learn about the concepts in depth, perhaps [starting with this introduction](./index.md).

!!! note
    You can add `custom_guardrails` on either a per-client or a per-server level. If you add it at the client level, the guardrail will be enforced on all servers used by that client.

### Schema
A custom guardrail is defined using the following fields:

| Name        | Type        | Description                            |
|-------------|-------------|----------------------------------------|
| `name`      | `string`    | A name for the guardrail.  |
| `id`        |  `string`   | A unique identifier for the guardrail. |
| `action`    | `Guardrail Action` | The `action` to take when this guardrail is triggered. See below. |
| `content`   | `string`    | A multiline string defining the semantics of this guardrailing rule. Please refer to the rest of this documentation to see how to write guardrails. |

**Example:** Defining a custom guardrail.

Below is a `yaml` fragment that shows how a custom guardrail can be defined to ensure emails are only sent to trusted recipients.
```yaml
...
custom_guardrails:
  - name: "Trusted Recipient Email"
    id: "trusted_email_check"
    action: block
    content: |
      raise "Untrusted email recipient" if:
          (call: ToolCall)
          call is tool:send_email
          not match(".*@company.com", call.function.arguments.recipient)
...
```

## Tool-specific guardrails
Tool-specific guardrails allow you to override or refine guardrailing behavior for individual tools within a given server. This is useful when certain tools require stricter enforcement, relaxed rules, or even complete disabling.


### Schema
The following fields are available for each `tool`:

| Name        | Type        | Description                            |
|-------------|-------------|----------------------------------------|
| `<default-guardrail>` | `Guardrail Action`   | Overrides the behavior of `<default-guardrail>` for this tool specifically. |
| `enabled`   | `boolean`   | Disables tool when set to <span class='boolean-value-false'>False</span>. If this field is not provided, it defaults to <span class='boolean-value-true'>True</span>. |


!!! note
    While the tools section does not allow for defining custom guardrails, you can always use the `call is tool:<tool_name>` syntax to select a specific tool, as shown in the example from the previous section.

**Example:** Disabling and overriding behavior for tools.

The `yaml` fragment below demonstrates how to disable the `send_message` tool and override the behavior for the `secrets` default guardrail to be `block` specifically for the `read_messages` tool.
```yaml
...
tools:
  send_message:
    enabled: false 

  read_messages:
    secrets: block
...
```

## Guardrail actions
Guardrail actions define how the system responds when a guardrail is triggered. These actions let you tailor enforcement severity across different contexts - whether to silently monitor behavior, stop execution entirely, or pause enforcement temporarily.

The following actions are available:

| Name        | Description                            |
|-------------|----------------------------------------|
| `block`     | This will block the client outright, preventing it from executing what triggered the guardrail. |
| `log`       | This lets the client execute what triggered the guardrail, but logs it in the console, so you can monitor the violation patterns without blocking the client's workflow. |
| `paused`    | This pauses the enforcement of the guardrail.  |

These actions are available for both default and custom guardrails.


## Priority of rules
When multiple guardrail rules are defined for the same context (e.g., a default guardrail set at both the server and tool level), the system follows a strict priority hierarchy to determine which rule takes effect.

This ensures predictable behavior and allows for precise control, especially when configuring environments with overlapping scopes.


!!! note
    **Custom guardrails are not subject to this priority system**. Once defined, they are always active and enforced with their specified action, regardless of other configurations.

### Rule Priority (from highest to lowest)
1. **Tool-specific guardrails**  
   Guardrails defined for a specific tool override all other configurations.
2. **Client/server-specific guardrails**  
   Guardrails set at the server level for a particular client are used unless overridden by a tool-specific rule.
3. **Implicit default guardrails**  
   If no explicit rule is defined, the default guardrails apply automatically with the `log` action.

**Example:** A simple config file with overrides.

To see how this hierarchy of precedence works, consider the following example configuration:

```yaml
client:
  server:
    guardrails:
      pii: block
      secrets: paused
        
    tools:
      tool:
        secrets: block
```

The resulting behavior of this configuration is:

- `secrets` is set to block for the `tool`, because tool-specific guardrails have the highest priority.

- For all other tools on `server`, secrets is set to `paused`, as defined at the client/server level.

- For any other client/server combinations not defined in the config, `secrets` will use the implicit default and be set to `log`.

- `pii` is set to block across all tools under `server` due to the client/server setting. For all other combinations, it falls back to the implicit default (`log`).

This precedence ensures that you can enforce strict guardrails where needed, while still benefiting from broad default coverage elsewhere.


## Example file
Below is a complete example of a guardrail configuration file. 
It demonstrates how to define default and custom guardrails for specific clients and servers, apply tool-level overrides, and selectively enable or disable tools

```yaml
cursor:
  email-mcp-server:

    # Customize the guardrailing for this specific server
    guardrails:
      pii: block
      moderated: paused

      # Define multiple custom guardrails
      custom_guardrails:
        - name: "Trusted Recipient Email"
          id: "untrustsed_email_gr_1"
          action: block

          # Guardrail to ensure that we know all recipients
          content: |
            raise "Untrusted email recipient" if:
                (call: ToolCall)
                call is tool:send_email
                not match(".*@company.com", call.function.arguments.recipient)


          # Guardrail to ensure an email is not sent after 
          # a prompt injection is detected in the inbox
        - name: "PII Email"
          id: "untrustsed_email_gr_2"
          action: log
          content: |
            from invariant.detectors import prompt_injection

            raise "Suspicious email before send" if:
                (inbox: ToolOutput) -> (call: ToolCall)
                inbox is tool:get_inbox
                call is tool:send_email
                prompt_injection(inbox.content)

    # Specify the behavior of individual tools
    tools:
      send_message:
        enabled: false

      read_messages:
        secrets: block

  weather:
    guardrails:
      moderated: paused

# Separate configurations on a per client/server basis
claude:
  git-mcp-server:
    tools:
      commit-tool:
        links: paused
```
