---
title: Copyrighted Content
---

# Copyrighted Content
<div class='subtitle'>
Copyright Compliance in Agentic Systems
</div>

It is important to ensure that content generated by agentic systems respects intellectual property rights and avoids the unauthorized use of copyrighted material. Copyright compliance is essential not only for legal and ethical reasons but also to protect users and organizations from liability and reputational risk.

!!! danger "Copyright Risks"
    Agents that generate code or other copyrighted material without proper authorization are at risk of violating copyright laws. This could expose your agentic system to legal liability:
    
    * Your agent may handle, process, and reproduce copyrighted material without permission.
    
    * You may unknowingly host copyrighted material without permission.
    
    * You may unknowingly expose copyrighted material to users.


Invariant provides the `copyright` function to detect if any licenses are present in a given piece of text, to protect against exactly this.

## copyright <span class="detector-badge"></span>
```python
def copyright(
    data: str | list[str],
) -> list[str]
```
Detects copyrighted text material if it is in `data` and returns the detected licenses.

**Parameters**

| Name        | Type   | Description                            |
|-------------|--------|----------------------------------------|
| `data`      | `str | list[str]` |  A single message or a list of messages. |

**Returns**

| Type   | Description                            |
|--------|----------------------------------------|
| `list[str]` |  List of detected copyright types. For example, `["GNU_AGPL_V3", "MIT_LICENSE", ...]`|

### Detecting copyrighted content
The simplest use-case of the `copyright` function is to apply it to all messages, as seen below.

**Example:** Detecting copyrighted content.
```guardrail
from invariant.detectors import copyright

raise "found copyrighted code" if:
    (msg: Message)
    not empty(copyright(msg.content))
```
```example-trace
[
  {
    "role": "assistant",
    "content": "/**\n* GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 3, 29 June 2007\n*/\nexport const someConst = false;"
  }
]
```
<div class="code-caption">Simple example of detecting copyright in text.</div>
